The topic of this talk is *saṁvega* and *pasāda*, which are defined by Thanissaro Bhikkhu [in this essay](https://www.dhammatalks.org/books/NobleStrategy/Section0004.html).

 &nbsp;

 &nbsp;

[1:51](https://youtu.be/61syXZk_aj0?t=111) What’s interesting about these places [where relics of the Buddha scattered] that are associated with the Buddha, is that the Buddha himself said they were places for giving rise to a sense of pasāda, or confidence. Then, in the commentaries, and in popular language in Thailand and all over South-East Asia, they’re called places for giving rise to saṁvega.  
I think part of the reason for that is that the Buddha took the saṁvega out of saṁvega. In other words, saṁvega originally meant terror. It was the feeling he felt when he was young. He realized that he too was subject to aging, illness, and death. He'd probably known it, but it didn't really hit home until one point, when he realized that all of the happiness he would search for: if it to a subject to aging, illness, and death, would leave him with nothing. He held a strong sense of terror, at how meaningless everything was, pointless everything was.  

As he said he saw the world as a small body of water drying up, and the fishes were fighting one another over the last remaining water. And it didn't matter who won because they're all gonna die.  
And everywhere he looked in the world, where he might want to lay claim to something on which to base his happiness, someone had already laid claim to it. So if he's gonna try for a happiness in the world he’d have to fight other people. That was his terror.  
But then he said the problem came from an arrow buried in the heart, and it was possible to remove the arrow. The arrow, of course, here is the suffering caused by craving. Once the arrow is removed then there's no more suffering.  

 &nbsp;

[3:57](https://youtu.be/61syXZk_aj0?t=237) The story that built up around the Buddha’s leaving home would have it that he had never seen any old people or ill people or dead people before. He was well into his 20s, then one day he went out and rode around the city and he saw them for the first time. Felt that strong sense of saṁvega. And then he saw a forest mendicant. In his version, the story he told himself, *if there's a way out, that's the way out*.  
The feeling he felt then, that there's a way out, was pasāda. Confidence.  
And it was through his practice -- as he did go out into the forest, first looking for teachers who would teach him the way to the Deathless, finding that nobody at that time knew anything about, realized he was going to find it on his own -- he still had the confidence that there must be a way out. That it must be attainable through human effort.  
Now, there is a paradox there. If something is free from suffering it has to be unconditioned. And so how could human effort, which is composed of conditions, create that? He realized he couldn't create it, but it just might lead there. And that's what he found: he was able to fabricate a path to practice, the Eightfold Path, that led to the threshold of the Deathless. Then, abandoning the path, he was able to enter into the Deathless.

And so, what he realised: that sense of the world closing, of in every opportunity for happiness already being laid claim to; the terror that he felt; the dismay -- he was able to shatter. He was able to show others that they didn't have to have terror or dismay over that, because there was a way out.  
And as a result saṁvega began to change. You see this even in the in the Canon itself. The later additions to the Canon describe saṁvega as a rapturous feeling, probably because by that time it had become so closely associated with pasāda. The Buddha had shown through his own practice and his teachings that it was possible to find a true happiness that didn't require fighting other people off. A happiness that was not going to end in death. And all the many people who followed him, who found that it was true, became witnesses to that truth. So whatever saṁvega they had felt before was now thoroughly replaced with pasāda. 

 &nbsp;

[7:10](https://youtu.be/61syXZk_aj0?t=430) So the associations of the word changed. And in the Apadānas, which are probably the very last part of the Canon, they talk about people who've made a gift to the Sangha, made a gift to the Buddha, and as a result of that -- and we’re talking about gifts many aeons ago –- they forecast that they would have become arahants in this lifetime here, under Gautama the Buddha. And it talks about their course for many many lifetimes: as Kings, as Queens, universal monarchs. And then finally, when they've had enough of all the fun that the world can provide, they let it go. But in a sense of rapture *and* saṁvega. In other words this is saṁvega that knows that there's a way out, it's confident there's a way out. It's not the saṁvega the Buddha felt when he was young, where it seemed like everything was closed.  
This is a saṁvega that's had all the doors open, and so no wonder there's a sense of rapture, that regardless of what the affairs of the world have been, what your life has been, there is something better. There's a way out. You're not trapped.  
This is the message of the Buddha’s life and the message of his passing away. He passed away totally peacefully. it inspired song and dance for seven days, and left behind a large following of people who had found the same freedom, the same purity that he had found. They had found the open doors. So they’ve kept that message alive ever since.  

So even though they talk about the people at the time feeling a lot of grief around the Buddha’s passing there were also the arahants. They said, well what can you expect, that's the nature of compounded things: they're gonna pass away. And they could meet hit even his death, the death of their teacher who'd found the way and shown it to them, they could meet that with peace.  
Years back a vipassanā teacher was studying with Ajaan Suwat, and asked him about his feelings when his teacher, Ajaan Funn, had passed away. And Ajaan Suwat said, when he was young, first studying with Ajaan Funn, sometimes the thought would come to him: *what will I do if anything happens to Ajaan Funn? I'll be totally lost.*  
But by the time Ajaan Funn did pass away he was much more solid in his practice, and he was able to view Ajaan Funn’s death with equanimity. This is the nature of things, to arise and pass away.  
It was the Buddha’s ability to train his students in that same solidity of mind: that's what took the terror out of terror. Turned saṁvega from something that was suffering from a sense of closed in meaninglessness, into something where the doors are wide open. So that's the Buddha’s accomplishment.  

[11:05](https://youtu.be/61syXZk_aj0?t=665) And the doors are still open now. That image of the open door, it comes in the Canon. The doors are open to the deathless, they're open when a Buddha open them. We have to make sure that in our own practice we don't close the door. We have to have confidence in our ability: it's not that the people back in those days were superhuman, they had many of the same foibles, sometimes worse problems than we do, but they were able to do this, able to do the practice. Get through that open door.  
They can do it, we can do it. This is why we commemorate events like this. It's to try to collapse the sense of time. Awakening is not something that’s far away: the path is right here, that's what the Buddha taught from the very beginning of his teaching career to the very end. The first thing he taught was the Noble Eightfold Path, the last thing he taught was the Noble Eightfold Path.  
That path is still here. It leads to an open door. So we should have a sense of confidence, that it is possible in general, and it is possible for us in particular. This part of the Buddha’s teachings is timeless. The truths he found [were] as true then as they are now and they're the same truths. It's up to use now to be true. To be honest, accountable, earnest in our practice. Take advantage of the open door while it's still open.