[2:24](https://youtu.be/N3yhcpI81pw?t=144) So we’ve been doing this ever since we've been two or so, turning our sense of the body, our feelings, our thoughts into worlds.  
And, as the Buddha said, the way we do that is what creates suffering. This goes against the grain when we hear that, because this is how we negotiate through the world. This is because we want to find our happiness in the world, the Buddha says happiness is not to be found in the world. It's gonna be found by getting out.  
It’s only when you've had a sense of *enough* in the world –and seen the drawbacks of trying to manoeuvre your way to the world, to get what little bits and pieces have happiness and well-being it has to offer -- it's when you’ve had enough that you're really ready to start doing the concentration practice.  

In Ajaan Lee’s early books, when he talks about concentration, he starts out with contemplations that are supposed to give rise to a sense of saṃvega, that's the emotion the Bodhisattva felt. This is what motivated his quest for awakening: he saw that the world was all laid claim to. There was nowhere he could go for happiness in the world that somebody hadn't already laid claim to, and if you were gonna try to get happiness out of it you were gonna have to fight them off.  
And the end result, of course, would be everyone is gonna die anyhow… but they would have had the karma of having been fighting one another. He felt a sense of dismay, in fact he felt a sense of terror: *this is all there is to life? Isn't anything better?*  
And he tried all kinds of ways of getting out, and finally found it was getting into the mind -- watching the mind as it creates its worlds, learning to steer it off in another direction -- that's the way out.  
So you have to back up. Every time you find yourself in a world, say: okay, I’ve created this. I’ve gotta drop it. And go back to the raw materials: the breath, your feelings around the breath, and your mind states related to the breath. Your mindfulness and alertness. Whatever elements of concentration you can develop. That’s a world that forms part of the path.


[9:23](https://youtu.be/N3yhcpI81pw?t=563) This is where concentration practice has its element of insight, because the insight is trying to look at those raw materials prior to being any kind of state of becoming, even a state of becoming that’s concentration itself.  
But you learn to get sensitive to them as you manipulate them to get the mind in concentration first.  
So, try to get down to the raw materials here.  
Which is why an important part of mindfulness practice is getting out of any reference to the world. While you're sitting right here, thoughts of your children, thoughts of your family, thoughts of work, thoughts of home, thoughts of your parents: that's all world.  
Then you want to develop a sense of saṃvega about the mind state that goes out looking for fulfilment in the world. Realizing it’s like that mouse pad I saw one time: it had a drawing of a mouse [and a mouse trap with some cheese], and under it was a caption saying ‘teenage mouse’. And the mouse is sticking its paw in the trap, and it's saying *I can so get away with this*.  
That's the way we live in the world, whether we’re conscious or semi-conscious of the dangers, there is always part of us saying *‘well I think I can get that little bit of cheese, other people have failed but I can do it.’* But it’s always set to go off.  

So you have to have a very live sense of saṃvega around the world. Because otherwise the mind very quickly goes to the world. It’s an old habit, it’s a habit that's been going on so long the Buddha says you can't find the beginning point. So when you’ve decided that you’ve seen the danger, you have to go back and convince the whole rest of your mind that that’s not where you wanna go.