[0:36](https://youtu.be/c9rG1sAoLmE?t=36) …as if our actions had no consequences. But the basic principle of the Buddha’s teachings is that our actions do have consequences, and there’s no one else there to protect us from our actions, there’s no one to save us, no one to wash our sins away. The world offers no shelter, so we have to provide shelter for ourselves.  
This is the principle behind restraint. The Buddha talks about restraint in two contexts: one is about restraining the things you bring in to your mind, the things you look at listen to, receive through all the senses. But you’re not purely receiving, the mind goes out, and that’s the other part where we have to exercise restraint; particularly in what we do and say and think.  
We like to think that, by doing meditation, it’ll take care of everything. Our life will get better and, in some ways it does. But the training goes the other way as well, starting with simple things like what you say, what you do. What you allow yourself to say, what you don’t allow yourself to say. And the same with your actions, the same with your thoughts, this will have an impact on your mind. As Ajaan Fuang said, *if you can’t control your mouth, there’s no way you’re going to control your mind*. It is a great way for learning about yourself, because we tend to act on impulse: we wanna say something, it comes right out. And then we have to think about it later, and sometimes if we don’t like what we did we refuse to think about it, and that way we don’t learn.

 &nbsp;

[3:19](https://youtu.be/c9rG1sAoLmE?t=199) If you expect any harm at all, no matter how much you may want to say it, or may how much you feel you may explode if you don’t say it; tell yourself it’s better to explode than to say something unskilful. And of course the exploding, part of that has to do with just the mind’s tricks. When you’re really angry, anger can squeeze your nerves, squeeze your blood vessels: so you feel like you’re going to explode. Well, you can breathe through that.  
When you hold yourself back and not give in to the impulse to say something unskilful, you’re going to learn a lot about the mind. Because the part that wants to say it will start complaining: you have to question it. And the more you can question it, the closer you get to the real reason why you wanted to say that to begin with. And you being to realise that there was nothing good there at all.

 &nbsp;

[05:03](https://youtu.be/c9rG1sAoLmE?t=303) Restraint is an expression of goodwill. We’d like to think of goodwill as overcoming boundaries and flowing without limit in all directions, and it does have its unlimited side – ideally. But it also means that you’re gonna hold yourself back: from doing, saying, thinking anything that’s harmful. It is not simply that the mind is naturally good and anything that would come out without restraint can be trusted. The mind has all kinds of potentials, and it can change back and forth more quickly than you can blink an eye. So you have to be careful, you have to be watchful. That’s part of goodwill too.