[2:54](https://youtu.be/YkKL6AKCukY?t=174) This is a way we act in lots of different circumstances, not only when we meditate. It’s simply a matter of learning how to do it with more skill and more sensitivity. As for feelings and perceptions, the feeling of pleasure that you're trying to create with the breath, and the perceptions you have around the feelings and perceptions you have around the breath: these are gonna have an impact on shaping your mind.  
And so what you've got here is a microcosm. These are the forces that are going to shape the rest of your life and your future lifetimes, as long as you're continuing to wander on. They're right here.  

 &nbsp;

[4:21](https://youtu.be/YkKL6AKCukY?t=261) The way you shape your experience, it’s going to determine your happiness, it’s going to determine your suffering. What do you shape it with? The bodily, verbal, mental fabrication. And these things are done both in response to events from outside but, more importantly, they go out looking for things -- shaping things even before you've seen them, before you've heard them. Your mind is already inclined.  
We see this most clearly in people with very strong doctrinaire political views. Person X says something and the people who hate person X already are gonna find something wrong with it, regardless of what X says. And if Y says something and they like Y then, no matter how stupid Y can be, they still like him. Yt's because of the way they're already fabricating things before anything happens.  
Of course, this doesn't happen only in politics we have certain attitudes about our feelings and our emotions. And so when a particular motion comes up we ride with it, even though it may be very detrimental. This is why we create suffering, because the mind is already biased.  
A particular impulse comes up and for some impulses the way is wide open in the mind. For other impulses there are a lot of checks and a lot of obstacles. It sometimes has very little to do with whether the impulse is skilful or not skilful. A lot of it has to do with things we like and don't like. But then our likes are very arbitrary. Seeing them as fabricated is going to be a huge step in making it a lot easier to practice. You may hold on to a particular like, and you don't like it when people don't react well to your like. It takes a while to realize, well, maybe… maybe I shouldn't like this. Or maybe I shouldn't hold on to that particular preference in this particular circumstance.  
This is probably one of the reasons why the Buddha focuses on suffering, because it's only when you see yourself creating suffering that you're willing to change your ways. Otherwise you just keep banging your head and complaining about the wall being in the way. Without thinking, *maybe I should stop banging my head in that particular direction*. But it's when you can see that you're creating the suffering, or at least willing to give that option a try: that's when you can be taught. So that's why the Buddha teaches, right there, at the part where you're most susceptible to maybe wanting to listen.  

 &nbsp; 

[7:54](https://youtu.be/YkKL6AKCukY?t=474) *[Section on a book where the Buddha was described as using ‘unskilful speech’ because the hearer did not like it]*: There's nothing necessarily wrong with saying things that people don't like. The Buddha said though you have to watch for the right time and the right place, but the idea that people's likes should be the determining factor, it's creating a tyranny of emotions. Just because one person doesn't like what the Buddha is saying doesn't mean that what the Buddha said was not skilful.  
What it made it skilful was that it was, one, true; two, beneficial; and three, he would choose the right time in the right place to be pleasing or displeasing. That's a much higher standard, and it's a much more livable standard. Because if we take our likes and dislikes as the measurement of the world we’ll never come to any peace. You have to step back from them and assess: these things that I like, do they really lead to happiness? The things that I don't like, do they really lead to suffering?  

[9:29](https://youtu.be/YkKL6AKCukY?t=569) Ajaan Suwat would often point out one very obvious example: we don't like suffering. We treat it as an enemy, he said we should learn how to treat it as a friend… not the kind of friend where you can let down your guard, but the kind of friend that you want to spend some time with, to get to know this person.  
We take craving as our friend and that's our enemy. It's under the force of craving that we do all kinds of harmful things, and then we don't even admit that there was any harm done. Or, if there was harm done, we didn't mean to, or we weren't responsible, or the person was harmed doesn't matter. In all kinds of ways the mind can justify harmful behaviour to itself: because it likes it.  
So you have to learn how to step back from our likes and dislikes. Step back from our cravings, and emotions that cover up the cravings, and really look at them. And say, maybe it's time to try measuring ourselves against the Buddha’s standard rather than measuring him against ours.  

 &nbsp;

[11:54](https://youtu.be/YkKL6AKCukY?t=714) We chant every night… *the Blessed One’s Dhamma is well taught*. And this is what it means: it's worthy of taking as a standard, even in areas where you don't like it. Because otherwise we keep on fabricating in lots of unskilful ways. Then we bring our preconceived notions, and we bring our prejudices and our biases, and our likes and dislikes, to everything that happens, everything that comes to us, and everything we go out looking for. And everything gets skewed as a result.  
We look at the line and it doesn't look straight… well maybe it's because the glasses we’re wearing have a curve, turn everything that is straight into something that’s curved. Maybe it's time we took off those glasses, and give the Buddha the benefit of the doubt.  
We have to know people for many, many centuries have been finding, *yes, the Dhamma is well taught*. Nobody said that about our likes and dislikes, that they're well formulated: we're the only ones who think that way. It's one of the reasons why we suffer.  
So it's good to step back. Look at this process of fabrication… taking the Buddha’s standards for what counts as skilful as your measurement, and at the very least give it a try.