[4:12](https://youtu.be/Qj-BbN3lUy0?t=252)He stuck with Ajaan Lee until the end of Ajaan Lee’s life, stayed on, made sure everything was arranged from the funeral, and then went off. He was very independent. Loyal but independent at the same time. As he liked to say: we’re nobody's servant. Nobody hired us to be born, nobody hired us to practice, so don't let people order us around.

 &nbsp;

[9:30](https://youtu.be/Qj-BbN3lUy0?t=570) His policy also was never to praise his students, except in cases where he felt a particular student wouldn't be making any further progress than that. I began to realize, if I heard him praise somebody, that was a sign that was as far as that person was going to go. If he felt there was room for improvement he’d keep finding ways to criticize you. […]  
Learn how to take criticism in the spirit with which it's just given, which is: here's the area where you need improvement, and if you improve you're going to be better off. You're not practicing to please somebody else, you're practicing because you have suffering in your heart. The teacher’s there to offer you advice on how to get rid of that suffering, that should be your motivation.  
Someone once came to the monastery and noticed that there was a Western monk there. So he asked Ajaan Fuang, “how is it that Westerners can ordain?” And his response was: *don’t Westerners have hearts? Can't they suffer too?* So, I think that was what pulled me to Ajaan Fuang to begin with. It was a sense that he cared about my training. He saw that I was suffering, he sympathized. But his sympathy was not the sort of sympathy of soft words. There was a sympathy of this is what you need to do, and if you're motivated, okay, you'll do it.  

After he died they created a museum of his effects. I was in charge of arranging things for it, and one of the things we arranged in there was his robe. I found one of his robes that he had darned, and I wanted to show that he took good care of his things. So I folded it up and placed it in the cabinet showing the spot that was darned. And a week or two after we placed it in there someone came running down, they said, there's something on the robe. I looked in the cabinet, it looked like this kind of a diamond dust on the robe. My first reaction was it was mould. I said, how did mould get on there? Because we had ironed the robe properly and everything. Everybody else was assuming that his sweat had turned into relics. And word got out. We’d have people come and visit the monastery to see the robe.  
One group in particular stands out. They were from the Education Ministry […] They asked, since he passed away, any other things that were amazing happen around Ajaan Fuang? And I said, I think it's pretty amazing that people drive all the way from Bangkok to look at a piece of cloth. They said no, no, no that's not what we meant. How about when he was alive, anything amazing?  
I said that, what I thought was amazing, was that even though he was Thai and I was a Westerner in my time with him I never had the feeling that that was a barrier between us. The communication was heart-to-heart. Even though I had to learn Thai ways of doing things, still, I had a strong sense that he didn't treat me simply as a Westerner: he treated me as a human being.

 &nbsp;

[14:38](https://youtu.be/Qj-BbN3lUy0?t=878) And, as always, when we think about the good qualities of people who have passed away, the question always is: how can we develop some of their good qualities? Such as a strong sense of duty, and that kind of independence that's willing to figure things out. Because this is a practice where we're not just sitting here accepting, accepting, accepting things as they come. We've got to figure out: the mind is suffering, it's creating its own suffering even though it wants happiness.  
Why? How? What can we do? We’re happy to accept help from those who have found a reliable way to the end of suffering, but as they all point out, the work is up to us. So you end up having to do what I did, even if it was just something as simple as learning how where the right places [to put Ajaan Fuang's things in his hut] were: you try things out. And then you look, see what the reaction is. Then try something else. You're not so afraid to make a mistake that you don't try, you've got to try. The mistake comes and, as Ajaan Fuang said, mistakes can always be rectified, if you're willing to look. Willing to admit that they’re mistakes, and look inside yourself for what went wrong.  
So become responsible. Become accountable. And that's how an independent streak becomes not just wilfulness and stubbornness, but it becomes an asset in doing your duty. Are you trying to comprehend suffering, abandon its cause, develop the path so you can realize the end of suffering? That's what we're here for. That should be your motivating force… that way that riddle of the heart -- *why does the heart create suffering even though it wants happiness?* -- has a chance of getting solved.