[2:20](https://youtu.be/9NAgQispd64?t=140) You're trying to sort out the voices inside and learn how to step back from them. Having the breath as a focal point allows you to get out of the conversations and to look at them.  
It's like going into movie theatre: if you sit and simply look straight at the screen your get sucked in. It's just a play of light across a very reflective screen, but you can see it as people, you can see it as locations of all kinds, and get pulled into the drama. You can laugh and you can cry, all over just a play of light.  
But if you're go and you sit at the side of the theatre, and look across, you see people sitting in the chairs, and a beam of light going over their heads, flickering. And they're laughing and crying, and you can see clearly: this is just a beam of light. This is the way you want to get with thoughts and the voices that come into the mind. These are just fabrications. And you begin to see that, like the people laughing and crying, some of the fabrications provide a lot of emotional juice. Anger comes along with them. Fear. Greed. Envy. All kinds of things. But. if you can see it simply as a play of light you begin to realize: why get involved? 

 &nbsp;

[6:30](https://youtu.be/9NAgQispd64?t=390) We have that phrase in English, you say, *well it's only natural*. In other words it's an excuse for saying, well, that's just the way it's got to be.  
But think of it in another way: *only natural, that's all it is*. Ageing is natural, illness is natural, death is natural. The desire for more becoming: all these things are natural. Suffering is natural.  
We're here to go beyond natural. We want something better than natural. So when you say something is only natural, think of it more as a put-down. Not as an excuse.  
Someone says something irritating or is acting in an irritating way: *it's only natural to be angry*. But can't you make your mind do something that's better than natural? That's what we're here for: something better than natural. Which is why the Buddha talks about a lot of the states of mind we find natural as we go through the day as being defilements. Again, he's not trying to say that you're a bad person for thinking in those ways, simply that your mind deserves better. Your mind should be brighter than this. You’re darkening the mind when you can engage in these things, you have a better potential. That's what he's saying.  
That image he has of the defilements being like clouds that obscure the sun. There's a lot of ink that's been spilled over that image, trying to say your mind is innately pure, innately clean. Ajaan Maha Bua has a good response to that: if the mind were innately pure, then how could anything defile it? And, if something could defile it, that means if you get it back to purity again, then it could be defiled again. The brightness is not purity, it’s simply the mind’s capacity to know, to know itself clearly, to be aware all around. As in a state of concentration. Then, from there, to see things more clearly.  
But if you've given in to your *only natural* desires and *only natural* defilements, you're obscuring the mind’s ability to see itself, to understand itself. For the mind to step back: that's not really natural, for it to see the voice as something separate, that's not really natural: that's a skill. 

During my first time with Ajaan Fuang I asked him, one day, about the needs of the body. I said, “how can you how can you follow the celibate life? The body has its needs.” And he said: “the body doesn't have any needs. The body would be perfectly content to die. We're the ones who have the needs. We're the ones who make the body get up, move around, do this, do that.”  
So whatever comes up you can't blame the body. The problem is in the mind, because the mind has just been *only natural*.  
This is why we bow down to the Buddha, because he found that there was something that was beyond *only natural*.  This is what the noble search is all about: what's natural is going for ageing, illness and death, or things that age, grow ill and die. Trying to solve the problem of suffering with a little bit of pleasure, but then more suffering follows on. Samsara is natural. Coming back and suffering again, that's what's natural. You look for something better than natural. And he found it.  
It means going against a lot of old, ingrained habits.