[0:04](https://youtu.be/Pj3FNNm283Q?t=4) There's a paradox in the Buddha’s teachings on criticism.  
On the one hand, he tells you not to take criticism too seriously: don't grab onto it, don't get upset by it.  
And on the other hand he says to take it to heart.

But actually the paradox is more *apparent* than real. If you get upset by criticism you're not going to hear it, you're going to hear the fact that somebody said something about you that you didn't like. And then [you’re?] going to go running off into why they might say something you might not like. And very rarely do you actually hear what the criticism is… and that way you don't learn from it.

This is why the Buddha taught Rahula, at the very beginning of his meditation instructions, make your mind like earth.  
The word for earth in Pali -- they actually have several words -- and one of them is khamā, which relates to the word for patience and endurance. If you can endure something we can actually see what it is. If you can't endure it all you see is your reaction. This is a principle that applies outside as well as inside. 

 &nbsp;

&nbsp;


[2:45](https://youtu.be/Pj3FNNm283Q?t=165) If you can make your mind like earth toward criticism, you can actually hear what's being said. Your reaction is not getting in the way, and then you have the chance to give it a more fair evaluation: is it worth listening to, or not?  
We sometimes think of endurance as being the virtue of dumb animals. In other words, they don't have the intelligence to react, so they just put up with things. But that's not the kind of endurance the Buddha is talking about.  
If you go around carrying burdens like an ox, you're going to begin to realize you're not an ox, and you're going to break down. You have to learn how not to carry these things.  
Think of the images at the beginning of the Dhammapada. The Buddha uses them to indicate the difference between your good karma and your bad karma. He says your good karma follows you like a shadow: it's weightless, you don't have to do anything, you don't have to drag it. It follows you on its own.  
Your bad karma is like it's like a cart that you have to pull. And it wipes out your footprints. In other words, it gets in the way of the good you'd like to do.  
Well, learn how to think of criticism as a shadow: something that's there to give you guidance, if you decide that it's worthwhile. But you don't have to carry it around. And don't think of it as a weight.

One of the reasons we find it so hard to go through the world is we keep weighing ourselves down, weighing ourselves down, and then someone else puts a piece of straw on our back. It's too much, and we blame the straw… forgetting to think about all that we're doing to weigh ourselves down, with our attitude about how other people should look at us, and our attitude of how we want to look in the eyes of other people, and the kind of self-image we have. You want to have a self-image that's not destroyed by criticism.  
The best one to have is the self that says *I'm proud to learn*, *proud to be willing to learn*.  
That was the attitude that the Buddha was trying to inculcate in Rahula in the very beginning. You start out with intentions, you check your intentions, and when they seem right you act on them. Then when you act on them, or you have acted on them, and you see that there was some harm that you did that you didn't expect: well, you go over and talk it over with somebody -- you're not too proud to talk it over, because you take pride in the fact that you're willing to learn.  

That way you can benefit from other people's criticism, [and] you can benefit from the praise.  
Sometimes we're as damaged by praise as we are by criticism, because we take it wrong. And here again, if you have the attitude that you're the sort of person who's willing to learn, ask yourself, *what is there in the praise that I should take to heart?* Then you can also start wondering: *well,  the person who praised me, what do they want out of me?*  
An ordinary reaction is we like people who praise us and dislike people who criticize us, [but this means] we're going to get fooled very easily. As the Buddha said, someone who points out your faults is like someone who's pointed out a treasure: if it turns out there really are faults, then you know what you have to work on.  
Of course, with someone who praises you, they may want something out of you. And you're not going to see that if you just allowed yourself to get popped up by the praise.  

So here again having a mind like earth is helpful. Good things get poured on the earth, and the earth doesn't swell up to meet them. They are just what they are and then the question is what's the best use you can make out of that. And if you can control your reaction enough so you can actually see what was given to you, then you can realize [whether] this is a gift or not with a lot more fairness.  
So learn to see endurance as a real strength as a real virtue. AS something that allows you to learn, and see yourself as someone who's willing to learn.