[0:41](https://youtu.be/FIwa8szDIZM?t=41) It was on that last night, the night of his parinirvāṇa, when Devas were paying homage to the Buddha with flowers, music, incense. And the Buddha told the monks, *that's not how you pay homage to the Buddha*. The true way to pay homage is to *practice the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma*. So tonight let's practice the Dharma in accordance with the Dharma.  
What that means is two things: one is practicing for the sake of dispassion, that's what the Dharma’s all about... Venerable Sariputta [summarised the teachings as] *our teacher teaches the end of passion*. *If those people are intelligent then they'll ask, the end of passion for what?* The answer is, **the end of passion for the aggregates**. Why would he teach the end of passion?  
Because when you have passion for the aggregates -- form, feeling, perception, fabrications, and consciousness –- and when those things change, you suffer. if you have no passion for them then they're going to change, but there'll be no suffering.  
So it's interesting: Sariputta didn't start with the Four Noble Truths, he didn't start with the three characteristics. He started with the goal of the practice, which is dispassion. In Thai, they have a way of putting two words together, and then the word they tend to put together with Dharma is *attha*: the goal, the meaning, the purpose. So we have the Dharma, which are fabrications the Buddha left behind: his verbal fabrications, instructions for us on how to practice. But then he also made it very clear that what the *attha* of the Dhamma was, was so that we could train our minds to find the true peace that comes with dispassion.  
A lot of people don't like the idea of dispassion. Nowadays, if someone asked, “what does the Buddha teach?” and you said *the end of passion*, they probably wouldn't ask anything further. So, we have to realize that dispassion is not a dead lifeless state. It's a growing up, it's a sobering up. We've been intoxicated for who knows how long on the process of becoming. We like to take on identities in different worlds of experience, because of what? Because of our passion. And desire becomes attractive. Then we take on an identity around that desire [because] we’re the person who will benefit from fulfilling that desire. And we’re also the person who can do something to bring it about. And the things we have to do to bring it about, and the place where those desires can be met, means that when you take on an identity there's a world that goes with that. And we’re fascinated with his this kind of experience, we do it all the time in the mind.  
Thing is, that when we do it in the mind, it doesn't stop there. It's not just an act of the imagination: it leads us to being reborn on all kinds of different levels. 

 &nbsp;

[6:23](https://youtu.be/FIwa8szDIZM?t=383) [Discussion of karma and rebirth within various realms. Lack of understanding of karma, lack of virtue means going to lower realms.] If they listened to the noble ones, believed in the principle of karma, they would go to high levels. Based on their actions that came from the views that they picked up from these other people. But even those high levels would fall.  
So, the next question was, *is there some way to train the mind so it doesn't have to continue in this up and down, up and down?*  
That was when he gained the third knowledge, was seeing things in terms of the Four Noble Truths. Seeing exactly *what is suffering*. So many people say the Buddha teaches ‘everything is suffering’ or ‘life is suffering’: that's not what he said. He said clinging is suffering. And there's a cause for the clinging. Craving. Craving for sensuality, craving for becoming. And then paradoxically, craving for non-becoming. In other words, when you've developed a particular becoming, and then you want to see it destroyed… that's not the escape from becoming. That actually creates a new type of becoming.  
That presented a dilemma. Any becoming you create is going to involve passion and delight: that's the clinging, that’s gonna involve suffering. If you try to destroy it, well, that takes on another type of becoming.  
The solution the Buddha discovered was to see things, as he said, as they've come to be: in other words the raw material from which we create these becomings. And then develop dispassion for the raw material. That was going to be the way out. He discovered it was possible to do that, and when you develop dispassion for the craving, and dispassion for the opposites of craving, that would be the cessation of suffering. And there's something you could do to get there: that was the fourth Noble Truth. 

 &nbsp;

[13:17](https://youtu.be/FIwa8szDIZM?t=797) [Topic: Virtue, concentration and discernment *when used for the purpose of dispassion*] And then, as the Ajaans have said again and again and again, they're like tools.  
Suppose that you're working on making a chair, making a table. As long as you're working on the project you've got to hold on to your tools. When the project is done you can put the tools down.  
In other words you have to eventually let go of virtue, concentration and discernment, so that you're dispassion can be total. As the Buddha points out, they too have their drawbacks: after all they're built out of aggregates, they are inconstant. So you can't rest just with the factors of the path: you have to let them go. And that's when dispassion shows its real rewards. Dispassion goes on to total release. That's the *attha* of the teaching.  
But this doesn't mean that, after a person has gained awakening, they come back out and they don't have any virtue or concentration or discernment: they still have those qualities. As Ajaan Lee points out, you look at the Buddha's life: he still was a virtuous person, he still used his powers of concentration and his discernment in order to teach. But the relationship was different, as the Buddha said, once you’ve gained full awakening you can still use these things, but your disjoined from them. In other words, you don't have to feed on them anymore. There's nothing more that needs to be done for the sake of cleaning up the mind, finding purity, finding release. As long as you’re still alive, there's work you can do. And it's good work, you can help other people find the way to dispassion and release as well.  
It's at the end of the arahant’s life, that's when they put everything down. Like the Buddha on the night of his total nibbana. He’d been teaching for 45 years, using all the good qualities he developed prior to his awakening, walking all over northern India, wherever there was someone who he knew was ready to receive the teaching, he would go. Even on the last day of his life there was one more person he had to teach: so even though he' was suffering dysentery that day, he walked. Many miles, finally lay down between two trees near Kusinara. Taught that one last person, and then he could let go totally. All the duties of the Buddha and finding the path and teaching the path were done. His work was complete.  
And he had entered Nirvana, as they say, *with no fuel remaining*. The image is of a fire that's going out. On the night of his awakening it became a fire that, it stopped burning but the coals were still warm. In other words, he still experienced pleasure and pain, but his mind was not affected by it, but there was still work to be done.  
On the night it was total Nirvana, that's when the fire went totally out. And for a lot of us the image seems to be kind of negative: but you have to remember back in India, their belief about fire was that, while it was burning it was agitated, clinging. When it went out it was released. No more agitation, no more clinging.It went out, not because the fuel released it, it was because it released the fuel. That's how it became free. So, that's the image we should keep in mind. The reason we're still stuck on these processes of becoming, weaving them again and again and again, it's not because of the becoming: we're the ones that are stuck.  
Ajaan Lee’s image is of eating food: the food is not attached to us, if we don't eat the food in the morning it's not going to cry. We're the ones that are upset when there's no food. In the same way we’re attached to becoming, we're passionate about becoming. It's for that reason that we're stuck. When we can develop dispassion, then we’re freed.  

 &nbsp;

 &nbsp;

 &nbsp;

*^^^YT ^^^auto-caption ^^^mistake: ^^^from ^^^“Tonight’s ^^^Visakha ^^^Bucha, ^^^the ^^^full ^^^moon ^^^in ^^^May” ^^^to ^^^“tonight's ^^^we ^^^suck ^^^a ^^^porch ^^^on ^^^the ^^^phone ^^^what ^^^in ^^^May”.*