[2:13](https://youtu.be/_gNwF8fOHUc?t=133) As the Buddha said, one of the great blessings of life, one of the great protections of life, is that you have yourself rightly directed. You have an idea of where you wanna go. And then you stick with it. We wanna make sure that you’re going to a good place. A lot of people have a lot of determination in life, but they head off in the wrong direction. Other people have a purpose for a little while, then they change direction, and then they got back again, and then they go someplace else.  
It’s like dust motes in the air. You see this beam of sunlight going through the air, and you see these little tiny pieces of dust float around. And they bump up against each other. They go around and up and down and back and forth: they don’t really go anywhere at all. I’ve never seen dust motes in a sunbeam march across the beam. And a lot of people’s lives are like that. Part of it is they get easily distracted, and part of it is they simply don’t have the strength to stick with one thing, even though they know it’s good.

[3:33](https://youtu.be/_gNwF8fOHUc?t=212) This is where you have to develop the qualities that will help you stick with it, and two of it are endurance and equanimity.  
Endurance is the ability to put up with difficult things and not do unskilful things in response. It’s a kind of independence of mind, that even though other people may be mistreating you, or this situation may be bad, you’re not going to make that an excuse to mistreat others or to act in bad ways. But to stick with it, to stick with things, you have to have some inner source of strength. And the mind has lots of inner resources: one of the sad facts of life is we have lots of resources inside, and we very rarely make use of them. We place limitations on ourselves by following our moods, by following ideas that are not in our best interest, and this is where equanimity comes in.  
Equanimity is something that the Buddha never teaches on its own, it’s always part of another set of qualities. If you’re just simply equanimous, accepting things as they are, and just being okay with that, you go nowhere.  
[4:58](https://youtu.be/_gNwF8fOHUc?t=298) The Buddha’s image is being like a goldsmith. This goldsmith has to put the gold in the fire, then he has to take it out and look at it, and then he has to blow on it. When it gets too cool he has to put it back in the fire again. As the Buddha said, you need all three of these activities.  
It’s the same with meditation: putting the gold in the fire stands for the effort you put in. But if you simply put in a lot effort, and don’t get the mind still in concentration, and don’t get a sense of equanimity, you burn yourself out. Just like gold will get burned up if it were stuck in the fire all the time.  
If you simply got the mind concentrated, things would sit there and wouldn’t develop. That’s like blowing on it.  
And if you simply looked at it, nothing would happen at all.  
The Buddha said, if you simply keep your mind in equanimity there’s going to be no concentration, so you have to learn to balance these activities. You put in the effort and you learn how to have equanimity about how long it’s taking, and equanimity about the things… that you would want to grab on to, to pull yourself away.