[[4:17](https://youtu.be/ErIeib1maIw?t=257)] **So if it’s true that even Buddhist countries are lands of wrong view, how much more so in a country like ours where… peoples’ values are all skewed?** And of course the values are not just out there, they’re inside. The Buddha said that wrong view comes from two things: one is the voice of another, words you’ve heard other people say; and then two is your own inappropriate attention. You can hear something right but there’s something in the mind that looks at it from the wrong way. You greed gets in the way, your aversion gets in the way, your delusion gets in the way, and you start asking the wrong questions. 

 &nbsp;

 [[6:27](https://youtu.be/ErIeib1maIw?t=387)] I know, in my own, when I went to Thailand, my very first two years... up on the mountain there… whole days to do nothing but practice. And a lot of voices came through the mind saying this is not right, you shouldn’t be doing this. This is selfish, this is immature, all the kinds of things that the mind would say to get in the way of the meditation. **And as long as I viewed those voices as my voices, or my thoughts, it was driving my crazy. Why was I divided against myself this way? But then I began to realise, these are voices I picked up from outside**, from people who didn’t know anything about meditation… When I could see they were coming from ignorance it helped, helped me gain some distance from them.

 &nbsp;

 [[09:17](https://youtu.be/ErIeib1maIw?t=557)] …the possibility of happiness is something the Buddha always left open for everybody. He taught the end of suffering, and before he taught people… he didn’t ask them, ‘this suffering that you’re experiencing right now, is it something you deserved?’… the question of deserving or not deserving to suffer, or to be happy, never came up. **It was always, suffering was a fact, it’s something that we do, it was something we can learn how not to do. The choice is ours in the present moment.**