[[1:19](https://youtu.be/ZxF3CynVySQ?t=79)] Most people go for householder joy, householder equanimity; in other words trying to find sights, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations or ideas that give refreshment to the mind, happiness to the mind. Or householder equanimity, looking for things that will calm you down in terms of those six senses. But the problem with the senses is that they keep changing. What was joyful may turn into something else, very quickly. So you find yourself back at the householder distress. We come to the meditation, the Buddha says okay, when there’s householder distress, we go for renunciate distress. That’s a step a lot of us like to skip. The distress there is realising there is a goal that other people have attained, it is possible, but you’re not there yet. And you think about all that needs to be done. And some people find this so discouraging that they go for a, sort of, halfway between householder and renunciate joy, or equanimity. In other words, actually going back to the householder type, comforting themselves with the idea that maybe there’s nothing to attain, or if I try to have an attainment I’m creating suffering for myself right now. So I’m getting upset over something I can’t see, so I might as well learn how to accept the way things are. **You try to anaesthetise yourself to the distress, and you end up with a very calm state, but again it isn’t solidly based. It needs constantly shoring up.** You see this in the people who say there’s nothing to attain, or the idea of attainment gets you upset so why bother with it? Just be okay in the present moment. But again, it easily slips back to the distress, it doesn’t get you out. The way out is to focus on the renunciate distress, as a motivating factor.

 &nbsp;

[[5:06](https://youtu.be/ZxF3CynVySQ?t=306)] Remember, part of that phrase that you’re supposed to run through your mind is there exists an attainment the other people have made, that other people have attained. That gives you hope. **Household distress is pretty hopeless. If you want household joy, household equanimity, but you keep seeing it fall apart, fall apart, it gets very discouraging.** You look at the human race and see how it behaves when things get difficult. And very often it’s not a pretty sight. But renunciate distress focuses you in a different direction, at the people who have attained awakening. They were noble people. I was reading, yesterday, about how the idea that there is an attainment that you can attain, that gets you out of this up and down of household distress and household joy, is a selfish idea, that devalues the world, and gets in the way of social progress. Well, there’s no way you’re going to attain awakening by being selfish. It requires generosity, it requires virtue, and these things set a good example in the world. It’s those people who have attained the goal of the renunciate life, whether they’re monastics or laypeople, who shine a light in the world. And so it is possible for a human being to pursue a noble goal and behave in a noble way.