We try to make goodwill the framework for our practice. After all it was the framework for the Buddha’s practice. He wanted a true happiness -- that was goodwill for himself -- and he wanted happiness that was blameless -- it was goodwill for others. Beyond that, once he had found the way to that happiness, he wanted to teach it to others so they could find that happiness too. That was a lot of goodwill.

And so we think of the example of Ajahn Mun who would spread thoughts of goodwill to all beings at least three times a day.
Then we give the practice a try, and I've heard many people say they can think thoughts so goodwill, but they don't get any warm feeling out of it. Well, it’s not necessary to have the warm feeling, as long as you think about other people's well-being and take that into consideration as you plan your actions: that's an awful lot right there.
After all you're gonna to be having goodwill for spiders and snakes, for people for whom it's very hard to have a warm feeling, and those are the cases where the goodwill is most necessary: as a protection for yourself so that you don’t do anything unskilful around those beings. You don't dismiss them saying, ‘oh it doesn't matter what I do with them.’ You have to take everybody into consideration, and everybody includes animals, as well as people; and bad people, as well as good people. We don't pretend that there are no bad people out there. We don't turn a blind eye to their bad habits. But we keep remembering that we need our goodwill, that's why we do it. We don't give it only to people who deserve it, we give it to everybody.

If the question of deserving comes up just ask yourself, well, do you deserve goodwill?
Now, the case may be, the answer may be no; if you look at your behaviour. But that's still no reason not to have goodwill. So, the question of ‘deserving’ shouldn't get involved. You want your goodwill to have an independent source inside, that’s independent of other people's goodwill and independent of other people's goodness. Because, again, it's your protection. You want to be protected on all sides.
Think of that image that Ajaan Chah picked up from Ajaan Mun: he said that practice should be in the shape of a circle, all around. In other words, it's not something you do only at certain times, and only with regard to certain people [continues from [3:42](https://youtu.be/kknIKqAW12c?t=222) on].