[0:17](https://youtu.be/Uj-3jOZEcmE?t=17) I don't know how many times I've heard people say, “if you desire to do well you're setting yourself up for disappointment, for stress, suffering. So just accept whatever comes.”  
But the Buddha was upfront about the fact that, yes, there will be stress, there will be pain, when you realize that you haven't reached the goal. But he says that's a desire to be cultivated, that's a pain to be cultivated. He calls that renunciate pain, he calls it pain not of the flesh. It's the pain that comes when you realize that you haven't reached the end of suffering, there's more to be done. Which is different from the pain of simply sitting around being miserable: because this pain actually motivates you to practice.

&nbsp;

[2:47](https://youtu.be/Uj-3jOZEcmE?t=167) Don't short-circuit the path by saying, well, the cause of suffering is desire, I just won't desire anything at all, I'll have zero expectations.  
That doesn't take you anywhere. It's like the Dharma teacher I once heard who said, after many years of teaching, she didn't know if there really was a cessation of suffering, didn't really know if the third Noble Truth was true. But she had her own truth: she called it the third and a half noble truth, which is that *suffering is manageable*. I'm surprised that she ranked it higher than the third truth.  
Contrast that with Ajaan Suwat’s attitude. He told me there was one point in his practice where he realized, with the Four Noble Truths: he knew the first, he knew the second, and he knew the fourth… but he didn't know the third. So he set about trying to figure out what is the cessation of suffering. Because he worked on it, and he put a lot of effort into it, he finally came to know. It's when you set high goals for yourself and stick with them, that's when you really benefit from the practice. So even though there's a pain that comes from realizing you're not there yet, there's more work to be done, that's a pain to be cultivated and acted on.  
[4:31](https://youtu.be/Uj-3jOZEcmE?t=271) The Buddha himself said the secret to his awakening was that *he would not rest content with skilful qualities*. What this means is that, if the skilfulness in his mind had not reached the level where it put an end to suffering, he would keep working on it more and more, he wouldn't just stop. This is why he left his first two teachers: they had taught him skills for concentration, he mastered them, and he realized that they didn't lead to the end of suffering. So he moved on, moved on. He tried six years of self-torment. That didn't work: he moved on. He kept looking for what would actually bring about good results.  
So he had very high expectations, and he stuck with them. He stuck with him skilfully. And he was finally able to reach, as he said, what he hadn't ever reached before, to attain when he had not attained before, to know what he had not known before. That's his message: there really is something special to be attained through human effort.  
During my first year with Ajaan Fuang he made the comment that there are some people who say the path is simply one of letting go, letting go. He said they forget the path also includes development. And you look at the customs of the Noble Ones: the fourth custom is delight in abandoning and delight in developing. In other words, you delight in abandoning unskilful qualities and delight in developing skilful qualities. You find your joy there.  
This theme goes all the way through the teaching even down to the Buddha's teachings to his seven-year-old son. Whenever you wonder about a Dharma teaching always go back to those instructions to Rahula, to see whether it would fit in with what the Buddha taught Rahula. There's no place where the Buddha taught him to have zero expectations: he said when you're going to act, ask yourself what are the consequences of this action going to be? Then, if you foresee any harm or affliction you don't do it. If, while you’re doing the action, you see that you didn't think it was gonna cause harm but it actually is, you stop. You don't just say, we’ll have to accept the fact that that harm is there: you stop. If you don't see any harm you continue. When the action is done you look at the long-term consequences, and if you see that you caused harm, again you don’t simply accept it, you resolve that you're not going to repeat that mistake, and you go over and talk over with someone who knows better. Get some idea of how you might avoid that mistake the next time around. And if you realize that you didn't cause any harm you take joy in that fact that you're progressing in the training. Keep with it.  
So there's a definite sense that you can improve by looking at your actions and looking at the consequences, learning from the consequences, and trying to make them better. Don't get caught in the trap of learned helplessness.

&nbsp;

[9:36](https://youtu.be/Uj-3jOZEcmE?t=576) There are meditation methods that would have you give up. Say, well, there's nothing to be attained, everything is inconstant, stressful, not self: just learn how to be okay with that and you'll be fine. But that's not the kind of equanimity the Buddha taught. His was the equanimity of a soldier who has to face setbacks and has to accept setbacks, but doesn't stay with the setbacks. He keeps looking for a chance to come out victorious.  
The equanimity is there to make sure that he doesn't get discouraged. It's not there to make him give up.  
And then just hit the day I received a letter from someone complaining about that Dharma talk. She had long quotes from a psychologist about how helplessness is a great condition, it's the human condition, this psychologist was saying that wherever you try to strive and find something in life you realize that it's always going to be beyond you. There's always going to be disappointment. There's always going to be a letdown. And when you realize that you're helpless and in the face of that, this person said, that's when you can find peace. Well, that’s the peace of the third and a half noble truth. In other words, the peace of giving up.  
It's like that Buddha's image alone the cow: you want to get milk out of the cow and you're twisting the horn, and the harder you twist it, the more you irritate the cow. You're not getting the milk you want. Then you stop twisting the horn: some people stop there, say it's much nicer not to be twisting the horn, you don't have to put in so much effort, the cow isn't irritated. But you still don't get the milk. You look around: there are other parts of the cow that you can pull on and twist on,  and finally you find that there's one part where you get the milk. There is something to attain, keep up your expectations.

 &nbsp;

[12:35](https://youtu.be/Uj-3jOZEcmE?t=755) So this is why we cultivate the desire to stay here with the breath, the desire to stick with all the aspects of the practice, and the desire to do it well. Because those are the desires that will take us to a place we've never been before. So if you've been taught to have zero expectations, erase that teaching from your mind. Remember the Buddha's approach: keep your expectations high, don't let yourself get discouraged, have patience realizing this may take a while. Have the equanimity of a soldier who faces setbacks, have the equanimity of a doctor when dealing with a patient: you may realize there are some things that cannot be cured, but the doctor doesn't let that stop him or her from treating the patient. You look for the areas that can be cured, the areas where, at the very least, the patient can be given some sense of comfort.  
So you learn hopefulness. You learn to be mature about your hopes. That way you'll be able to attain things you've never attained before, and you find that they really are worth attaining.