The basic premise of the Four Noble Truths is that we're suffering because we're doing something wrong, but we can learn, we can do it right.
We learn from people who've learned how to do it right themselves, which is one of the reasons why criticism is such an important part of the training. Because sometimes you can see your own faults: this is why the Buddha taught Rahula to look at his actions as he would look at a mirror. He would see his intentions reflected there, he'd see his skillfulness reflected there.

But Rahula wasn't left to his own devices, when he saw that he made a mistake or he suspected he might have made a mistake, he was to go and talk it over with someone more advanced on the path. And that person could help point out where Rahula had gone wrong. This is why we have the Sangha, otherwise people would just go out and practice on their own, thinking that they could depend on themselves. But you need the eyes of somebody else, there's a lot of yourself that you can't even see.
How many parts of your body can you actually see? Many parts, to see, you would have to have a mirror or two mirrors; but to look at them directly requires somebody else. You see this principle in the [teaching of the Kalamas](https://www.dhammatalks.org/suttas/AN/AN3_66.html). The Buddha starts out by saying, when you know for yourselves that something is unskillful then you should avoid it, if something is skillful you should develop it. But he doesn't stop by saying simply ‘skillful’, he says ‘something that is praised by the wise’, that's something to follow. Something that is criticized by wise, that's something to avoid.
So again, you're depending on the insights of others. People who have more experience than you do.
And you should treasure their criticisms, not feel like you've been unfairly singled out. As the Buddha said: regard someone who points out your faults as someone is pointing out treasure, because there is your opportunity to see something you may have missed in your own behaviour, and only then can you do something about it.

Years back, about a month after Ajaan Fuang passed away, I went to pay my respects to Ajaan Maha Boowa. I went along with another more senior monk from Wat Asokaram whose students drove us there, and in the course of being with Ajaan Maha Boowa for half an hour I got criticized three times. And when we left the other monk said to me, ‘you know, I've visited Ajaan Maha Boowa I don't know how many times, he's never criticized me once, I'm jealous.’ That's the right attitude to have. We're here to learn.
And the Buddha's idea of a safe environment is one in which you can learn about your faults and have space to work on them. Sometimes we hear nowadays people saying that they'd like a safe environment where everything is non-judgmental and nobody makes any criticisms, nobody says anything challenging. That's an unsafe environment because it leaves you where you are, and where you are is suffering.

A safe environment is where someone you trust points out things, gives you an opportunity to look at yourself in a new light and to learn.
The safety there is you're not simply left to your own devices, because the people who leave you don't pass judgment on you, they basically don't care. ‘You can do what you want, it's fine with me,’ they say; but do they care where your actions are going to lead you? Because part of the issue is learning how to care yourself about the results of your actions. This is a very basic principle in the Dharma, it's a quality of mind, a quality of heart, that the Budda calls ottappa, translated as compunction. That's when you think of doing something, and you know that's going to be unskillful, and you realize I don't want to have to deal with the results of something unskillful. It's basically a belief in the principle of karma combined with right resolve: that you want to avoid creating more unskillful things than is necessary.
And in some of the suttas it’s paired with atappa, ardency, when you don't just try to avoid unskillful things but you try to develop skillful things in their place. And you're really serious about it, there’s this quality of being serious about wanting to improve yourself -- that's proven when you're willing to take criticism.
If you don't take criticism, or don't take it well, how serious are you about really wanting to practice the Dharma?