[10:09](https://youtu.be/6ruAYrTmcOs?t=609) And Ananda’s comment was the Buddha was teaching how to get across the river going from one clinging to the next. So you will be clinging as you follow the path, and the more consistent you are in clinging to Right View the better.
Our problem is we hold on to it some times and then change our minds other times.

And so watch out for the justifying voice that says well I’m letting go, I’m showing that I’m not clinging. That’s not the case, you’ve just gone back to cling to something that’s not as skilful, and then you get stuck in what Ajaan Lee talks about when he describes the two paths. He’s saying that that our problem is that we follow the right path sometimes and then the not right path other times, and as a result we don’t really get anywhere.
If you wanna get someplace you hold on to the right path all the way. So watch for this tendency of the mind to want to switch around, and remember that there’s no justification in the Dharma for it. And especially watch out for that voice that say well I’m learning how to be unattached. That’s very seductive, and it sounds like it’s got the Dharma on its side. This is one of the things we have to watch out for all along: the defilements can begin to sound like Dharma sometimes. They can take a Dharma teaching that’s true and beneficial, but it’s not the right time. Or it may not even be true, it sounds right, but if you look at it carefully you begin to realise something’s off.

All this comes down to that tendency that Ajaan Chah noted. He said, when you really look at your mind, one of the first things you realise is how much it lies to itself. It can take the Dharma and turn it into not-Dharma, and yet think it’s still got the Dharma.